**Table of Contents**
- [Searching and Sorting Algorithms](#searching-and-sorting-algorithms)
  - [What Is Binary Search and How Does It Differ From Linear Search?](#what-is-binary-search-and-how-does-it-differ-from-linear-search)
  - [What Is Divide and Conquer, and How Does Merge Sort Work?](#what-is-divide-and-conquer-and-how-does-merge-sort-work)

### Searching and Sorting Algorithms
#### What Is Binary Search and How Does It Differ From Linear Search?
Searching through a list of items is a common occurrence in computer science. There are two key algorithms you should know about when it comes to searching: linear search and binary search.

Linear search starts at the beginning of a list and iterates through each item until it finds the target value it is looking for.

If the target value is found, the index where it's located in the list is returned. If the target value isn't found, `-1` is returned. We return `-1` because it's not a valid index in most programming languages.

Here is what the code looks like for linear search:
```python
def linear_search(arr, target):
    for i in range(len(arr)):
        if arr[i] == target:
            return i
    return -1
```
If the list we'll search through is `[13, 4, 7, 9, 10]` and the target value is `9`, the function would return `3` because `9` is at index `3`.

If we changed the target value to `5`, the function would return `-1` because `5` is not in the list.

While this is a relatively straightforward algorithm, it is not the most efficient. If you have a large list of items, linear search can take a long time to find the target value.

The time complexity of linear search is `O(n)` because the time it takes to search through the list grows linearly with the size of the list.

The space complexity of linear search is `O(1)` because it doesn't require any additional space to search through the list.

Binary search is a more efficient algorithm for searching through a large list of items. The condition here is that the list must be sorted in ascending order.

Binary search works by dividing the list in half and checking if the target value is in the middle of the list. If the target value is in the middle of the list, the index of the target value is returned. Otherwise, the algorithm checks if the target value is in the left or right half of the list.

It continues to divide the remaining parts of the list into halves until the target value is found. If the target value is not in the list, it returns `-1`

Here is what the code looks like for binary search:
```python
def binary_search(arr, target):
    low = 0
    high = len(arr) - 1

    while low <= high:
        mid = (low + high) // 2  

        if arr[mid] == target:
            return mid
        elif arr[mid] < target:
            low = mid + 1
        else:
            high = mid - 1

    return -1
```

#### What Is Divide and Conquer, and How Does Merge Sort Work?
The divide and conquer paradigm in computer science is a technique for recursively breaking down problems into smaller sub-problems. One of the key aspects of this technique is recursion, which happens when a function calls itself repeatedly until a base case is reached. In this lesson, we will take a look at the merge sort algorithm to better understand how the divide and conquer technique works.

Let's say we had this list of numbers:
```md
42 37 53 17
```

The goal is to sort that list from smallest to largest using the merge sort algorithm. The first step is to divide that list in half:
```md
42 37 | 53 17
```

Then we need to look at the left side of the list:
```md
42 37
```

We take that sub list and divide in half again until each sub list has only one item in it:
```md
42 | 37
```

A list with only one item in it is sorted by default. Next we need to merge each of those one element sub lists into a sorted list:
```md
37 42
```

Then we follow the same process for the right side of the original list:
```py
# right side of original list
53 17

# divide the list in half
53 | 17

# merge the lists in sorted order
17 53
```

Now that both halves of the original list are sorted, we merge those two halves together and sort the elements:
```markdown
17 37 42 53
```

Here is what the algorithm looks like in code:
```python
def merge_sort(arr):
    if len(arr) <= 1:
        return arr

    mid = len(arr) // 2
    left = merge_sort(arr[:mid])
    right = merge_sort(arr[mid:])

    sorted_list = []
    i = 0
    j = 0

    while i < len(left) and j < len(right):
        if left[i] <= right[j]:
            sorted_list.append(left[i])
            i += 1
        else:
            sorted_list.append(right[j])
            j += 1

    sorted_list.extend(left[i:])
    sorted_list.extend(right[j:])

    return sorted_list
```
The time complexity for merge sort would be `O(n log n)` because the list is continuously divided in half (`log n`) and then merged together (`O(n)`). Unlike other sorting algorithms like bubble sort, merge sort is not sorted in place and has a space complexity of `O(n)`.
